[FLINK-20343] Add new Deployment overview documentation page (#14222)
apache/flink: docs/ops/deployment/overview.md

---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

Flink is a versatile framework, supporting many different deployment scenarios in a mix and match fashion.

Below, we briefly explain the building blocks of a Flink cluster, their purpose and available implementations.
If you just want to start Flink locally, we recommend setting up a [Standalone Cluster]({% link ops/deployment/local.md %}).

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

## Overview and Reference Architecture

> The figure below shows the building blocks of every Flink cluster. There is always somewhere a client running. It takes the code of the Flink applications, transforms it into a job graph and submits it to the JobManager.

Reviewer: Not sure about the backticks. If we decide to go this way, then it needs to be applied consistently throughout the whole document.

> The figure below shows the building blocks of every Flink cluster. There is always somewhere a client running. It takes the code of the Flink applications, transforms it into a job graph and submits it to the JobManager.

Author: How about writing it as JobGraph, so that the reader notices it as a Flink terminology. Adding Backticks everywhere could disrupt the reader's flow a bit.

The JobManager distributes the work onto the TaskManagers, where the actual operators (such as sources, transformations and sinks) are running.

When deploying Flink, there are often multiple options available for each building block. We have listed them in the table below the figure.

If you don't know where to start, we recommend using the Command Line Interface for submitting Flink applications to a Standalone Cluster.

<!-- Image source: https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1s_ZlXXvADqxWfTMNRVwQeg7HZ3hN1Xb7goxDPjTEPrI/edit?usp=sharing -->

> <img width="100%" src="{% link fig/deployment_overview.svg %}" alt="Figure for Overview and Reference Architecture" />

Reviewer 2: That's personal taste now, but: Could we have a bit of margin around this picture here? :-)

Author: I'll look into it ;)

> <table class="table table-bordered">

Author: Yes, I'll fix that!

  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th class="text-left" style="width: 25%">Component</th>
      <th class="text-left" style="width: 50%">Purpose</th>
      <th class="text-left">Implementations</th>
    </tr>
   </thead>
   <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>Flink Client</td>
            <td>

>               Flink batch or streaming applications are compiled into a dataflow graph, which is submitted to the JobManager.

Reviewer: Maybe
```suggestion
              Compiles batch or streaming applications into a dataflow graph, which it then submits to the JobManager.
```

            </td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li><a href="">Command Line Interface</a></li>
                    <li><a href="">REST Endpoint</a></li>
                    <li><a href="">SQL Client</a></li>
                    <li><a href="">Python REPL</a></li>

>                     <li><a href="">Scala REPL</a></li>

Reviewer: links are missing.

Author: I wanted to wait for your restructuring PR to be merged before putting proper links.

                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>JobManager</td>
            <td>
                JobManager is the name of the central work coordination component of Flink. It has implementations for different resource providers, which differ on high-availability, resource allocation behavior and supported job submission modes. <br />
                JobManager <a href="">modes for job submissions</a>:
                <ul>
                    <li><b>Session Mode</b>: one JobManager instance manages multiple jobs sharing the same cluster of TaskManagers</li>

>                     <li><b>Application Mode</b>: runs the cluster exclusively for one job. The job main method (or client) gets executed on the JobManager.</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                    <li><b>Application Mode</b>: runs the cluster exclusively for one job. The job's main method (or client) gets executed on the JobManager.</li>
```

>                     <li><b>Per-Job Mode</b>: runs the cluster exclusively for one job. The job main method (or client) runs only prior to the cluster creation.</li>

Reviewer: I'd suggest to put session mode last.

>                     <li><b>Per-Job Mode</b>: runs the cluster exclusively for one job. The job main method (or client) runs only prior to the cluster creation.</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                    <li><b>Per-Job Mode</b>: runs the cluster exclusively for one job. The job's main method (or client) runs only prior to the cluster creation.</li>
```

>                 </ul>

Author: I don't have a strong opinion on this one, as there is probably no right or wrong here.

I wanted to mention the three modes here already, because they are essential to understand for the resource provider detail pages.

            </td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li><a href="">Kubernetes</a></li>
                    <li><a href="">YARN</a></li>
                    <li><a href="">Mesos</a></li>
                    <li><a href="">Standalone</a> (this is the barebone mode that requires just JVMs to be launched. Deployment with Docker, Docker Swarm / Compose, non-native Kubernetes and other models is possible through manual setup in this mode)

>                     </li>

Author: I agree my current order is messed up. I basically did: order by number of users + standalone mode ;).  I'll put standalone on top.

                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="3" class="text-center">
                <b>External Components</b> (all optional)
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>High Availability Service Provider</td>
            <td>

>                 Flink’s JobManager supports a high availability mode, where multiple JobManagers participate in a leader election process, resulting in an active JobManager and potentially multiple standby JobManagers, allowing for fast failover in case the active JobManager is lost.

Reviewer: Maybe: Flink's JobManager can be run in high availability mode which allows Flink to recover from JobManager faults. In order to failover faster, multiple standby JobManagers can be started to act as backups.

            </td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li><a href="">Zookeeper</a></li>
                    <li><a href="">Kubernetes HA</a></li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>File Storage and Persistency</td>
            <td>
                For checkpointing (recovery mechanism for streaming jobs) Flink relies on external file storage systems
            </td>
            <td>See <a href="">FileSystems</a> page.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Resource Provider</td>
            <td>
                Flink can be deployed through different Resource Provider Frameworks, such as Kubernetes, YARN or Mesos.
            </td>

>             <td>See "JobManager" implementations above.</td>

Reviewer: Maybe set anchor link if possible.

        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Metrics Storage</td>
            <td>
                Flink components report internal metrics and Flink jobs can report additional, job specific metrics as well.
            </td>
            <td>See <a href="">Metrics Reporter</a> page.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Application-level data sources and sinks</td>
            <td>
                While application-level data sources and sinks are not technically part of the deployment of Flink cluster components, they should be considered when planning a new Flink production deployment. Colocating frequently used data with Flink can have significant performance benefits
            </td>
            <td>
                For example:
                <ul>
                    <li>Apache Kafka</li>
                    <li>Amazon S3</li>
                    <li>ElasticSearch</li>
                    <li>Apache Cassandra</li>
                </ul>
                See <a href="">Connectors</a> page.
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

> ## Deployment Modes

Reviewer 2: We should name these things in the same way where possible: The overview calls this the "job submission modes".

Flink can execute applications in one of three ways:
 - in Session Mode, 
 - in a Per-Job Mode, or

>  - in Application Mode.

Reviewer: Should we order them 

1. application mode
2. per-job
3. application mode

 The above modes differ in:
 - the cluster lifecycle and resource isolation guarantees
 - whether the application's `main()` method is executed on the client or on the cluster.

<!-- Image source: https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1EfloufuOp1A7YDwZmBEsHKRLIrrbtRkoWRPcfZI5RYQ/edit?usp=sharing -->

> <img width="100%" src="{% link fig/deployment_modes.svg %}" alt="Figure for Deployment Modes" />

Reviewer 2: Could we match the order of the job submission modes of the picture and the sections below?

Reviewer: Maybe the marketing team could help us with beautifying this picture. No offense for your artistic skills Robert!

#### Session Mode

*Session mode* assumes an already running cluster and uses the resources of that cluster to execute any 
submitted application. Applications executed in the same (session) cluster use, and consequently compete
for, the same resources. This has the advantage that you do not pay the resource overhead of spinning up

> a full cluster for every submitted job. But, if one of the jobs misbehaves or brings down a Task Manager,

Reviewer: Same here with "Task Manager"

> then all jobs running on that Task Manager will be affected by the failure. This, apart from a negative

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then all jobs running on that TaskManager (or task manager) will be affected by the failure. This, apart from a negative
```

impact on the job that caused the failure, implies a potential massive recovery process with all the 
restarting jobs accessing the filesystem concurrently and making it unavailable to other services. 

> Additionally, having a single cluster running multiple jobs implies more load for the JobManager, who 

Reviewer: Here we write JobManager. Hence, I'd suggest to make it consistent.

includes downloading the application's dependencies locally, executing the `main()` to extract a representation
of the application that Flink's runtime can understand (i.e. the `JobGraph`) and ship the dependencies and
the `JobGraph(s)` to the cluster. This makes the Client a heavy resource consumer as it may need substantial
network bandwidth to download dependencies and ship binaries to the cluster, and CPU cycles to execute the
`main()`. This problem can be more pronounced when the Client is shared across users.

Building on this observation, the *Application Mode* creates a cluster per submitted application, but this time,
the `main()` method of the application is executed on the JobManager. Creating a cluster per application can be 
seen as creating a session cluster shared only among the jobs of a particular application, and torn down when
the application finishes. With this architecture, the *Application Mode* provides the same resource isolation
and load balancing guarantees as the *Per-Job* mode, but at the granularity of a whole application. Executing 
the `main()` on the JobManager allows for saving the CPU cycles required, but also save the bandwidth required

> for downloading the dependencies locally. Furthermore, it allows for more even spread of the network load of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for downloading the dependencies locally. Furthermore, it allows for more even spread of the network load for
```

<div class="alert alert-info" markdown="span">
  <strong>Note:</strong> In the Application Mode, the `main()` is executed on the cluster and not on the client, 
  as in the other modes. This may have implications for your code as, for example, any paths you register in 
  your environment using the `registerCachedFile()` must be accessible by the JobManager of your application.
</div>

Compared to the *Per-Job* mode, the *Application Mode* allows the submission of applications consisting of
multiple jobs. The order of job execution is not affected by the deployment mode but by the call used
to launch the job. Using `execute()`, which is blocking, establishes an order and it will lead to the 
execution of the "next"  job being postponed until "this" job finishes. Using `executeAsync()`, which is 
non-blocking, will lead to the "next" job starting before "this" job finishes.

<div class="alert alert-info" markdown="span">
  <strong>Attention:</strong> The Application Mode allows for multi-`execute()` applications but 
  High-Availability is not supported in these cases. High-Availability in Application Mode is only

>   supported for single-`execute()` applications.

Reviewer: @kl0u are we failing if we are running a multi-execute job with HA enabled?

Supported Environment:
<span class="label label-primary">Huawei Cloud</span>

#### Ververica Platform

[Website](https://www.ververica.com/platform-overview)

Supported Environments:
<span class="label label-primary">AliCloud</span>
<span class="label label-primary">AWS</span>
<span class="label label-primary">Azure</span>
<span class="label label-primary">Google Cloud</span>
<span class="label label-primary">On-Premise</span>

## Deployment Best Practices

### How to provide dependencies in the classpath

Flink provides several approaches for providing dependencies (such as `*.jar` files or static data) to Flink or user-provided
applications. These approaches differ based on the deployment mode and target, but also have commonalities, which are described here.

To provide a dependency, there are the following options:
- files in the **`lib/` folder** are added to the classpath used to start Flink. It is suitable for libraries such as Hadoop or file systems not available as plugins. Beware that classes added here can potentially interfere with Flink, for example if you are adding a different version of a library already provided by Flink.

> - **`plugins/<name>/`** are loaded at runtime by Flink through separate classloaders to avoid conflicts with classes loaded and used by Flink. Only jar files which are prepared as [plugins]({% link ops/plugins.md %}) can be added here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`plugins/<name>/`** are loaded at runtime by Flink through separate classloaders to avoid conflicts with classes loaded and used by Flink. Only jar files which are prepared as [plugins]({% link deployment/filesystems/plugins.md %}) can be added here.
```

> ### Download Maven dependencies locally

Reviewer: Should this be part of the overview page? Maybe it is better suited for tips & tricks.

Reviewer 2: I would agree that the whole Deployment Best Practices should be moved somewhere else. To me it feels like being out of scope for this page.

Author: I removed this part.
